


H1: Duwamish Tribe: Seattle's Indigenous Legacy

[Navigation: Home / About / History / Present / Resources]

Hero / meta: Explore the vibrant history and present of the Duwamish tribe — the original inhabitants of Seattle.

H2: About the Duwamish

The Duwamish (dxʷdəwʔabš) are a tribe of Indigenous people whose territories comprise regions within present-day Western Washington and the Puget Sound area. Known as the “host tribe for Seattle,” their history and culture has informed much of past and present Western Washington, including the significance and naming of many of the area’s cities, towns, and landmarks. The Duwamish tribe itself is considered self-identified yet not federally recognized, although many members of the larger Duwamish claim federal recognition through other tribes. This website aims to delve more deeply into the history and culture of the Duwamish people, their current presence in the area, and the status of and concerns regarding their land ownership in the region.


H2: History

H3: Origins

The name “Duwamish” is an Anglo-Europeanized version of dxʷdəwʔabš, which translates in English to “people of the inside,” in reference to the tribe’s settlement along the area’s Duwamish, Cedar, and Black Rivers. With archaeological evidence suggesting habitation in the Duwamish watershed by humans as far back as 8,000 years ago, and Duwamish stories detailing events during the most recent ice age, the Duwamish have occupied the Puget Sound region for as long as history has been documented.

Born in 1780, Chief Si’ahl, for whom the city of Seattle is named, grew to become the most influential and historically renowned Duwamish chief. Si’ahl was recognized from a young age for his strength and fearlessness, and, as the child of a mother from the Duwamish tribe and a father from the Suquamish, grew to inherit a role as the chief of both tribes.

By the 1850s, Chief Si’ahl was celebrated more for his peaceful, diplomatic efforts rather than for his prowess in battle. When European immigrants arrived in the Americas in the mid-19th century, Si’ahl greeted them at Alki Point near Duwamish Head. The new European-American immigrants noted the efforts of Chief Si’ahl and the dxʷdəwʔabš in striving to live amicably alongside them. Si’ahl provided the immigrants with assistance and resources, such as lumber for canoes and dwellings; crops and agricultural labor; the teaching of survival skills; and collaboration in the creation of Henry Yesler’s first sawmill.

The Treaty of Point Elliott was signed in 1855 between the United States Government and various tribes of the Pacific Northwest outlining territorial rights between the parties. Shortly after the signing of the treaty, however, European immigrants backed out of the agreement. This led to an outbreak of war, even pitting some tribes against one another. In accordance with the treaty’s initial terms, the Duwamish had exchanged 54,000 acres of land for the promise of reservation along with hunting and fishing rights. These acres now comprise much of present-day King County, including the cities of Seattle, Bellevue, Mercer Island, and Tukwila. 

H3: Twentieth century

Prior to The Great Depression, development of the area accumulated a consistent pace, particularly in the logging and agricultural arenas. This reached a peak coinciding with the start of World War II, leading Seattle’s industrial regions to grow to new levels. Boeing built factories in Renton wetlands and along the Duwamish River, while the Pacific Car and Foundry Company (PACCAR) followed suit, expanding their own plant in the area.

The mid-20th century saw an increase of pollution in the Duwamish River, with the effects of municipal sewage and industrial chemical runoff becoming a notable concern. While attempts were made to mitigate this damage as early as the 1940s, it wasn’t until the 1958 establishment of the Municipality of Metropolitan Seattle (METRO) and its sewage treatment system that the river’s water quality began to improve. Development, however, continued to increase, and the Duwamish River became home to even more industrial and residential centers. The runoff of this development led to the river accumulating even more pollutants, harming its biodiversity and its role as a source of sustenance and veneration for the Duwamish and Muckleshoot peoples that it had been for thousands of years. 

The benefits that these developments brought to non-Native newcomers came at a great expense to the region’s Indigenous communities. After the initial broken treaty arrangements were followed by displacement from traditional gathering areas and the disruption of local, significant ecosystems, the stability of the Duwamish and other Indigenous groups of the region was greatly affected during this period.



H2: The Duwamish in the Present Day

Today, the Duwamish tribe is still active, with Cecile Hansen — the great great grandniece of Chief Si’ahl — acting as its current chair. Despite the tribe’s longevity and history, the Duwamish are still not among the 29 Indigenous tribes of Washington State that receive federal recognition and ensuing benefits. Resulting from the broken arrangements of the 1855 Point Elliott Treaty, the tribe never received reservation protection. In an effort to compensate the Duwamish for the treaty’s transfer of land, 1,000 members of the tribe were each given $64 in 1971 — an amount that equates to only $64,000 for 54,000 acres of modern King County.

Over the past several decades, without federal recognition the tribe has struggled to provide its 600 enrolled members with social, health, educational benefits, as well as with cultural programs. While the actual number of individuals with dxʷdəwʔabš ancestry is estimated to be higher, many choose instead to register among tribes that receive official recognition and benefit status through the U.S. government. 

H3: Duwamish language

The Duwamish speak a language known as tʷəlšucid, or Lushootseed, which itself comprises two different dialects. In 2002, Zalmai “Zeke” Zahir became instated as head linguist of the Duwamish Language Program, which was established to revitalize the tʷəlšucid language for present generations.

H3: Duwamish culture and crafts

As with most groups that have long-spanning ties with a geographical area, the Duwamish people have historically incorporated a lot of the surrounding environment into their daily lives and routines. Many Duwamish homes throughout the years have been located near bodies of water, which has played a central role in the tribe’s culture and traditions. Canoes became an integral part of life, and the Duwamish crafted numerous types to adapt to different uses, ranging between hunting, fishing, racing, and transportation. The waters and forests of the Pacific Northwest have provided many staples of the traditional Duwamish diet, including fish and waterfowl as well as game, root vegetables, and Pacific Northwest fruits. 

Weaving and carving play large roles in traditional Duwamish expression and handicraft, while oral history has also been a significant part of the Duwamish culture over the years, highlighting stories that incorporate aspects of generosity and compassion alongside an emphasis on health and hard work. The tribe has also incorporated much of the region’s abundant plant life into herbal medicines, affirming an importance placed on mental and physical well-being. Meanwhile, Duwamish potlatches are held to encourage tribal communication, celebrate important life events, and foster spiritual togetherness. 


H2: Resources 

H3: Further reading

“History of the Duwamish People.” Duwamish Tribe. Retrieved 2/1/2024 from https://www.duwamishtribe.org/history

“Chief Si’ahl”. Duwamish Tribe. Retrieved 2/1/2024 from https://www.duwamishtribe.org/chief-siahl

“Treaty of Point Elliott”. Duwamish Tribe. Retrieved 2/1/2024 from https://www.duwamishtribe.org/treaty-of-point-elliott

“Culture Today” Duwamish Tribe. Retrieved 2/1/2024 from https://www.duwamishtribe.org/culture-today

“Indigenous Tribes of Seattle and Washington”. American Library Association. Retrieved 2/1/2024 from https://www.ala.org/aboutala/indigenous-tribes-seattle-and-washington

Updegrave, Cynthia. “Duwamish-Green Watershed”. Essay20272. 12/31/2016.
Retrieved 2/2/2024 from https://www.historylink.org/File/20272


H3: Help support the Duwamish tribe

Donate to Real Rent Duwamish to help offset the cost of rent
https://www.realrentduwamish.org/
			
Sign the Petition for federal recognition
https://www.change.org/p/federal-recognition-for-the-duwamish-tribe?recruited_by_id=6e1efaa0-7dc7-11eb-b698-63712cf77020&recruiter=1184346959&utm_campaign=psf_combo_share_initial&utm_content=cl_sharecopy_27187850_en-US%3A3&utm_medium=copylink&utm_source=share_petition&utm_term=psf_combo_share_initial
